The Project Gutenberg EBook of Poems, by D. M. Matheson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: Poems

Author: D. M. Matheson

Release Date: March 25, 2016 [EBook #51554]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)











                                 POEMS

                                  BY

                            D. M. MATHESON

                             EX-PRINCIPAL

                        ALEXANDER MCKAY SCHOOL

                       [Illustration: colophon]

                            HALIFAX, N. S.




CONTENTS


Indian Summer                            3-4

Mother Love                                4

Petoobok                                 5-6

Langemarc                                  7

Edith Cavell                               8

Cardinal Mercier                           8

The Bard of Ayr                            9

The Soul of Flanders                      10

The Gardens                               11

Keep the Gardens Growing                  12

An Elegy Written in Richmond           13-17

The Cottage School                     18-21

December Sixth 1917                    22-23

Life Is But One Darn Thing After Another  24

Courcellette                           25-26

Vimy Ridge                             27-28

God Save Our Empire                       29

The Veteran                               30




INDIAN SUMMER


    Fair are fleets of white winged prows
      Swiftly sailing o’er the sea;
    Fair are herds of homing cows,
      Winding slowly o’er the lea;
    Fair are orchards, when replete
      With rich blossoms pink and white;
    Fair are fields of ripening wheat
      Shining in the morning light;
    Fair is any mountain sheet
      Burnishing in colors bright;

    Fair are all Acadia’s lands;
      All its streams and wooded lakes,
    Headlands high and pebbly strands,
      When the early morning breaks,
    Fair its scented flowers and trees,
      And its many landlocked bays,
    Rippling in the summer breeze;
      Themes for minstrel muses’ lays--
    But far fairer than all these
      Are Acadia’s autumn days.

    Made from heavenly design
      By some unseen Artisan;
    Gift of Architect divine,
      To Acadia’s Weather man.
    Fairest season of the year,
      When boon Nature’s at her height
    Robed in all her beauty sere,
      And fair Luna sheds her light
    With a more bewitching cheer
      Through the watches of the night.

    And God’s lowly creatures all,
      Who the freeman’s burden bore,
    Having heeded labor’s call
      Now have plentitude in store,
    And from every household hearth
      Nightly offered up the “word”.
    As a sacrifice of worth
      To a kind and gracious Lord
    For the riches of the earth,
      Filling thus the family board.

    And a thrill of peaceful joy
      Permeates the human breast
    And the starry vaulted sky
      Seemingly is at its best,
    For old Sol in all his pride
      Scorpion doth then adorn,
    Midway in his yearly ride
      ’Twixt the Line and Capricorn.
    In this lovely Autumntide
      Was Waegwoltic’s wedding morn.

[Illustration: decoration of text]




MOTHER LOVE


    Mother! All that’s blest and good,
      Centres round that treasured word,
    Mother-love and motherhood!
      Sweetest sounds man ever heard,
    Mother! blest and sweetest name,
      Spoken by the human tongue,
    Age and youth do thee acclaim,
      Angels have thy praises sung,
    And the greatness of thy fame,
      Hath through all the ages rung.

    Mother-love! whose fountain flow,
      Feedeth man the living breath,
    And which burns with tenser glow,
      Even when he’s cold in death;
    Blest and wondrous gift divine
      Of the master Artisan
    In fair Eden’s holy shrine
      To the fallen creature man,
    When fell Satan did design
      To destroy Creation’s plan.

[Illustration: decoration of text]




PETOOBOK


    Of Petoobok and of its golden sea,
      The fairest gem of Nature’s fashioning
    The beauty spot of beauteous Acadie,
      Its summer and its winter scenes I sing:
    Here in primeval days great Neptune wise
      Conspired with Fora, bounteous and free,
    To make a masterpiece, a paradise,
      Where Nymphs and Naiad’s might forever woo;
    And now by night and day it ever lies
      Reflecting in its waters, deep and blue
    The heavenly wonders of the vaulted skies.

    In splendour, wild and picturesque and grand,
      Beneath its sentinel hills like crystal set
    With rarest taste by God and Nature’s hand.
      It mirrors in its depth the silhouette
    Of mountains, which, like heroes of romance,
      Along its lovely shores forever stand,
    To guard the waters of its vast expanse,
      And holds to-day the same bewitching charm
    Of loveliness divine, you to entrance,
      As on the morn the cry of Golden Arm,
    Burst from the lips of sons of sunny France.

    Lake Petoobok, on summer afternoon
      Looks fair and lovely to the mortal gaze,
    And lovely too, what time the hunter’s moon
      Illuminates it with her bewitching rays,
    As it lies sleeping ’neath its guardian hills
      By Flora robed in beauty, rare and boon,
    With foliage of variegated frills
      On which the dancing beams like fairies glint
    And from Dame Nature’s ample store distils
      Those dyes of one and thousand autumn tints
    Wrought by some magic hand in fairy mills.

    But Petoobok is fairest to behold
      On Autumn morn, when orient Sunlight breaks
    In radiant glory on its arm of gold,
      And gentle noosuk[A] into the ripples shakes,
    The placid surface of its crystal sea,
      And to the eye a vista doth unfold,
    A wondrous scene of heavenly alchemy,
      Like that told us by John in Holy Writ,
    Which fills the soul with perfect ecstasy,
      And which once seen, though time be preterit
    In after life in dreams you’ll ever see.

 [A] West wind.s




LANGEMARC

(1915)


    Sleep on ye brave Canadians,
    In Langemarc’s blood-stained mead,
    Your glorious act will ever rank
    A truly golden deed,
    Sleep on with France and Briton
    And Belgian, side by side,
    Sleep ye and they your last long sleep,
    The last roll call to bide.

    And mother nature, gentlest nurse,
    Will ever nightly lave
    Your lowly grave with kindly dews
    While weeping willows wave;
    And kindly zephyrs every day,
    And every night will sigh,
    A sweet memoriam for aye,
    Your tomb to sanctify.

    And Belgian maids and matrons, too
    Will often leave the loom
    To gather wilding flowers,
    To beautify your tomb;
    And peasants when they pass your way,
    Oft to their sons will say:
    “’Twas here the brave Canadians
    The fierce Huns held at bay.”

    And when the Angel Gabriel,
    Shall sound the trumpet blast,
    Then you shall all awaken
    From your seeming death at last,
    And, standing at attention,
    While angel voices sing,
    In unison you will salute,
    The universal King.




EDITH CAVELL

(1916)


    Dear martyred maid, thy cruel death hath thrilled
    With loathing deep the whole of human kind
    Against the Hun who thy death sentence signed;
    Thy barb’rous death all manly hearts hath filled
    With feelings such as never can be stilled;
    In every home thy name is hence enshrined,
    Thy death scene pictured clear in every mind
    In thy life’s blood, the murd’rous Hun hath spilled
    Angelic maid, could we but lift the veil
    Which hides from mortal eyes God’s holy land
    With Joan of Arc and Florence Nightingale,
    Thy wounded temple with a filet bound,
    With harp in hand, thy head with glory crowned,
    Amidst the heavenly choir we’d see thee stand.

[Illustration: decoration of text]




TO CARDINAL MERCIER

(1916)


    Illustrious shepherd of the Prince of Peace,
    With priestly zeal you watched thy Belgian fold,
    Any aye performed its duties manifold,
    That love and virtue did therein increase,
    And want and sorrow all the while surcease,
    While Christian culture her rich page enrolled
    Heroic men and women chaste to mould;
    The cross, thy sceptre, and the crook, thy creese:
    But when the robber Hun assailed thy flock,
    Then stood you forth, the patriot and priest,
    With clarion call to champion the right,
    And met the onset of the Prussian beast
    And all the hosts of his embattled might,
    Firm and immovable, as Zion’s Rock.




THE BARD OF AYR

(1915)


    Oh come sweet muse, with well tuned lyre,
      On this our Robbie’s natal day,
    A rustic poet’s mind inspire
      That he may sing a homely lay.

    Of all the warblers ever born,
      I dearly love the bard of Ayr,
    Whose lovely songs both night and morn,
      Have freed my wearied mind from care.

    If fault he had, ’twas Nature’s fault,
      And man, beware that you have none,
    Before you do yourself exalt,
      To cast at Robbie Burns a stone.

    I wish he was with us tonight,
      To pass a pleasant hour or two,
    And fill all hearts with rare delight,
      As he was ever wont to do.

    Methinks e’en now I see him sit
      The centre of an eager throng,
    And hear his ceaseless flow of wit,
      Or words of some soul stirring song.

    His lovely songs will e’er be sung,
      And greener grow his memory,
    ’Mong people whether old or young,
      Till father Time has ceased to be.




THE SOUL OF FLANDERS

(1916)


    The chimes that oft from old Malines,
    Rang out their sacred strain,
    At morning, noon and eventide,
    Shall never ring again;
    That voice that called the living,
    Or sadly mourned the dead,
    Is still and silent now for aye:
    The soul of Flanders’ fled.

    The peasant at his daily toil,
    Shall listen now in vain,
    From early morn till evening,
    To hear those chimes again;
    But never shall such silver sounds
    By harmony inbred,
    Fall on his ever listening ears;
    The soul of Flanders’ fled.

    Those lovely chimes, which e’er were wont
    To sound with morn’s first beams,
    And ’wake the tourist from his sleep,
    Will haunt his waking dreams;
    But never more those dulcet sounds
    Will rouse him from his bed,
    And fill his soul with ecstasy:
    The soul of Flanders’ fled.

    ’Tis strangely sad such chimes as those,
    Which seemed a heavenly dow’r,
    Should fall a prey to tyranny,
    And war’s barbaric pow’r,
    A city new will rise again
    Up from its ashen bed,
    But those old chimes shall ring no more:
    The soul of Flanders’ fled.




THE GARDENS

(1914)


    Lovely Gardens, Eden’s bower,
    Lovely in sunshine and shower.
    Winding walks and shaded seats,
    Babbling streams and cool retreats,
    Flowing fountains throwing spray,
    O’er the fishes at their play,
    Geese and ducklings in the pond,
    By the white swan chaperoned,
    Grassy plots well trimmed and neat,
    Decked with flowers, gay and sweet,
    Trees and shrubs so sweetly blending
    All its beauties never ending;
    Fit place for the aged to talk
    And for babes to learn to walk;
    Wandering swains and straying madams,
    Modern Eves and modern Adams;
    Place where friend a friend may meet;
    Lovers here each other greet,
    And a groom and summer bride
    On their honeymoon abide.




KEEP THE GARDENS GROWING

(1918)


    We were summoned from the play-ground,
    We were called in from the wood,
    And our country found us ready
    At the stirring call for food.
    Do not add unto our burden,
    If you hap to pass along,
    For, although our backs are breaking,
    You can hear us sing this song:--

    CHORUS

    Keep the gardens growing,
    Digging, planting, hoeing;
    If you plant and weed aright
    The crop will grow.
    Do not stand repining
    While the sun is shining,
    Turn the good soil inside out,
    And fertilize and sow.

    Mother Britain sent a message,
    To her daughter in the West,
    “We need every kind of food-stuffs,”
    So we’re bound to do our best;
    For the soldiers in the trenches
    And the homeland we must feed,
    And no worthy son will fail her,
    When his mother is in need.




AN ELEGY WRITTEN IN RICHMOND


I

    Low in the eastern sky the breaking light
    Pales in the vault of heaven the morning star,
    Presaging me the dying hour of night,
    And that the twilight gray is not afar;


II

    For night is slowly changing into morn,
    And through the gloom the forms of ships appear.
    Across the Arm below, the bugle horn
    Reveille’s call brings to my listening ear.


III

    No other sound is on the morning air
    To echo back from hills and dales around;
    No home has man; no beast has here lair,
    And desolation seems to own the ground;


IV

    Save me who sit beneath an aged elm
    Which some one’s home at Richmond once did grace,
    Ere fell misfortune did it overwhelm
    And left this tree alone to mark the place.


V

    Yet here I am beneath this hoary tree
    And ruminate upon the recent past--
    If such events again should hap to be--
    The ruins round their gloomy bodings cast.


VI

    But still I sit amidst these scenes of death
    Which call to mind that dire December day,
    When Fate unkindly blew his blighting breath,
    Reducing homes to dust, and men to clay.


VII

    And question thus: “Was there no law amiss?
    Had no officials power to prevent
    A devastation, dark and drear, as this?
    Was Richmond’s loss naught but an accident?”


VIII

    And in my breast a rising hate I feel
    For man-made Laws which oft protect the High
    And leave the Low their grievous wounds to heal
    And bear their load of sorrow till they die.


IX

    A sense of sadness passes through my soul,
    An earthly grief akin to human-kind,
    But ere this sorrow sad doth reach its goal
    Celestial musings fill my troubled mind.


X

    The hatred lately felt within my breast
    And which I vainly thought naught could allay
    Until my spirit passed to its last rest;
    I surely find is speeding fast away.


XI

    Some Spirit sweet seems near to me abide
    Who doth from me remove all earthly dread,
    And in most soothing ways my senses chide
    That I hold counsel with the living dead.


XII

    I look around to see whose is the voice
    Whose cadence falls so sweetly on my ear
    As thus to make my hating heart rejoice,
    But vain my quest, no living soul is near.


XIII

    A spirit voice I know, it needs must be
    That sounds upon the air with silv’ry tone
    And yet, withal, no fears arise in me,
    Though midst the ruins here I am alone.


XIV

    The voice now cautions me to listen well,
    And in harmonious tones with lightning speed
    This story he narrates for me to tell,
    And thus I write it down that all may read.


XV

    “That fatal morn, when Richmond felt secure,
    With many more I ran to yonder hill
    To watch the burning ship, all feeling sure
    That nothing round could do us harm or ill.


XVI

    “And why should aught around fill us with fears
    Did we not know: The flag that braves the breeze
    On land and sea for full one thousand years,
    Flew o’er our city still and o’er our seas?


XVII

    “The scene was bright and beautiful and grand,
    With florid streamers shooting far on high,
    And none who viewed the scene from sea or land
    Were cognizant they were so soon to die.


XVIII

    “Whose was the fault is not for me to tell.--
    The Judge of All shall surely justice mete
    To those who prematurely rang our knell
    When they are come to His just judgement seat.


XIX

    “You wonder why I wander ’neath the vault
    Of heaven here and fain would ask--
    ’Tis but to beg forgiveness of a fault
    And do again another ill-done task.


XX

    “Though young in life, in wisdom now I’m old,
    For I’ve passed through the chast’ning purge of fire;
    My harp, though silver now, will soon be gold,
    When time has passed and I have mounted higher.


XXI

    “Along the path with slow increasing pace
    Into the realms of peace where all is light;
    ’Till I have reached my time allotted seat,
    There, to enjoy the beatific sight.


XXII

    “Of God for aye and His hosannas sing,
    Amidst the saints of His twice chosen few,
    Before the treble throne of God, our King,
    The vision of whose glory’s ever new.


XXIII

    “The path is long, yet shorter may be made
    By alms and prayers and other deeds of worth;
    The happy day may, too, long be delayed
    By thoughtless unforgiving hearts on earth.


XXIV

    “Then do good deeds while in the flesh, my friend
    And trespassers forgive, lest you forget
    Such charity, till you have reached the end
    Of life with some one unforgiven yet.


XXV

    “Take heed that you will e’er remember this,
    Lest you, as others did so oft before,
    May cross that cold and ever dark abyss
    Which separates earth from the spirit shore.


XXVI

    “Which lieth far beyond the farthest sun,
    And trembling stand before high Heaven’s court
    With unforgiven thought and task undone;
    No camouflage to which you can resort.


XXVII

    “Be ye a man of lore, unlearned or youth,
    Will there, as here on earth, avail you aught;
    Nor will forensic speech conceal the truth
    In your account of deed and word and thought.


XXVIII

    “In stilly night I’ve often wandered here
    Far from those realms beyond the starry sky,
    O’er that long way, so lonely, dark and drear,
    But now the hour of bliss for me draws nigh.


XXIX

    “For soon the pearly gates, which now bar me,
    Through which the sainted souls have ever trod
    Will open wide and I shall ever see
    The pristine glory of the throne of God.”




THE COTTAGE SCHOOL.


I

    Summer time was in the waning,
      Vesper Sun was wending low,
    And reminiscences brought me
      Back to school days long ago
    There the school-house stood before me,
      And I was on hallowed ground,
    Where each old association
      Inspiration breathed around.


II

    Full in view the school was standing
      Near the road and yet aloof,
    Four square walls in ochre painted,
      Topped off with a cottage roof.
    In the distance old Atlantic
      Glistened as in days of yore,
    While upon his glimmering bosom,
      White caps rolled towards the shore.


III

    On the diamond boys were playing
      Base-ball, with eclat and shout;
    Saw the batter three times fanning,
      Heard the umpire’s “Batter’s out.”
    Saw some other hit a grounder,
      Speed away like a winged bird;
    Heard the rooters merry shouting,
      As he landed safe on third.


IV

    Heard the maidens merry laughter,
      As they played upon the green,
    And the rythm of their footfalls,
      Skipping o’er the hard terrene,
    Saw the little boys and maidens
      Drinking at the nearby well:
    And upon the air vibrating
      Heard again the master’s bell.


V

    Plainly heard the foot-step sounding
      On the floor with measured beats,
    While the boys and girls were filing
      Through the aisles towards their seats.
    Saw the whole class sitting upright,
      In position, one and all;
    Heard distinctly “Here” and “Absent,”
      Answered to the master’s call.


VI

    I could see the master’s visage,
      With its look of learned lore,
    While Sol’s summer shadows lengthened
      Slowly o’er the school house floor;
    O’er his head there hung a motto
      With the words, “God Bless Our School”
    Standing in the left-hand corner
      Was the oft-used Dunces’ stool.


VII

    Heard him from the Holy Bible
      Read from some New Testament,
    And to each and every passage,
      Young and old, attention lent.
    Heard once more the school repeating
      Earnestly the Saviour’s prayer,
    While around a holy stillness
      Floated on the ev’ning air.


VIII

    Saw the school take first position
      At the sound of warning gong,
    Heard the master’s voice intoning
      Some old school or college song;
    Saw all in position standing
      With demeanour calm and still;
    Saw them going through the movements
      Of the military drill.


IX

    On the walls the maps were hanging,
      Colored in blue, red and gold,
    Ornamented with the pictures
      Of the noted men of old.
    Moral maxims, plainly written
      On the board in plain relief,
    “Order Is First Law of Heaven,”
      With some others terse and brief.


X

    Summaries of all the home-work
      By to-morrow to be learned;
    Saw, too, some make interchanges
      When the master’s back was turned.
    On their slates the younger pupils
      Strove to make their cranes and hooks,
    While the older ones were busy
      Writing in their copy books.


XI

    Heard them spell and give the meaning,
      And pronounce in unison;
    Heard them too, in concert reading,
      Reading also, one by one.
    Saw them, on the Black-board, parsing
      With and without formal line;
    Use of “a” and “n” explaining
      “These” and “those” and “thy” and “thine.”


XII

    Heard them drill at combinations,
      Learn to multiply and add,
    Now subtracting, now dividing,--
      Doing as the master bade;
    Saw them on the map locating
      Chiefest places of the earth;
    Heard them give events in History,
      ’Fore and since our Saviour’s birth.


XIII

    Heard them, too, at Nature lessons,
      Saw the card within their hands,
    With the Flora and the Fauna
      Of our own and other lands;
    Heard the master talk on Civics,
      And our duties to the State,
    And on Etiquette and Hygiene,
      Heard him, too, at length dilate.


XIV

    Not an incident was missing
      Of those school days long since fled,
    Though so many of its members
      Now were numbered with the dead.
    And too swiftly passed the vision
      Retrospective of the past,
    And upon my soul its setting
      Fleeting specks of sadness cast.




DECEMBER SIXTH, 1917.


I

    It was a clear and cool December dawn,
    And bright the Sun in all his glory rose
    And shed his radiant rays in plenty on
    The lovely arm which by our city flows,
    And on the hills and dales and distant trees
    By Nature robed in early winter mien:
    All Labour was awake; the docks and quays
    Were all astir and formed a busy scene;
    The flag flung to the breeze o’er Citadel
    Gave heart to all: last night the sentry cried,
    As o’er his beat he trod, that all was well,
    And old and young thought but of Christmas-tide.
    “Lord God of Hosts,” what is that awful roar
    Upon all ears rolls from the Richmond shore;


II

    I’ll ever hear that death-portending sound
    And see the dead as side by side they lie,
    And see the desolation wrought around
    And hear the dying’s dissolution cry;
    And see the houses bursting into flame
    And those within consumed in tongues of fire,
    And that long line of young, and old, and lame
    Move slowly on when ordered to retire
    From their wrecked homes to seek some safe retreat.
    With falt’ring step and slow and wearied gait;
    And see the motor cars whirl down the street
    Full laden with their bloody, human freight:
    For not, till in my breast the spirit dies
    Will these sad scenes evanish from my eyes.


III

    And ever see the op’ning hour of school,
    And hear the bell sound on the morning air,
    And see each little one with reticule
    And well-trained poise and step assembling there,
    And each pale-faced teacher in her place
    And all the children there on bended knees,
    With innocence imprinted on each face,
    And hear their prayer borne on the morning breeze,
    And hear the glass and falling timbers crash,
    And see the children through the windows leap
    With blood fast flowing from each gaping gash
    Upon their heads and faces, long and deep;
    And fain am I to fall into despair
    That scenes so sad should follow children’s prayer.


IV

    And ever see the blinded lying low
    At Bellevue, Camp Hill, and College Hall;
    And ever see the corpses, row on row,
    Their mangled faces covered with a pall:
    And curses such as tongue could never speak
    Rise in my heart and flutter through my mind
    Upon the man who did such ruin wreak
    And leave such grief and misery behind;
    And then a change comes o’er my angry thought
    And I can see outlined upon the Cross
    The Man of Sorrows, and I think of what
    He did that Death be not our loss;
    And bowing down I cry on bended knee
    My Lord, my God, I yet have faith in Thee.




LIFE IS BUT ONE DARN THING AFTER ANOTHER.


I

    Whether in childhood or when you grow older,
    Whether in summer or when it grows colder,
    Whether in sunshine or lightning and thunder,
    Be it on land or sea over or under,
    Whether winter frosts freeze you or summer heat smother,
    This you will find until life’s cord will sunder,
    Life is but one darn thing after another.


II

    Whether you cry from grief or smile with laughter,
    Think of the present or past or hereafter,
    Whether you’re rooming or whether house-keeping,
    Sewing or darning or dusting or sweeping,
    Dreaming of yours or some other girl’s brother,
    This you will find whether waking or sleeping,
    Life is but one darn thing after another.


III

    If you have peace of mind or if you worry,
    If things move slowly or if in a hurry,
    If you make hasty steps or if you tarry,
    If you stay single or if you marry,
    Whether you barren be, whether a mother,
    This you will find whate’er hap or miscarry,
    Life is but one darn thing after another.




COURCELLETTE.


    Early on an autumn morning,
      Facing famous Courcellette,
    Lay the Twenty-fifth battalion,
      In the trenches damp and wet;
    Far away from home and kindred,
      Near the far-famed river Somme,
    Here and there a man lay dying,
      Stricken by a shell or bomb.

    Men of every trade and calling,
      Of each company formed a part,
    Downy youth and bearded manhood
      From the farm and from the mart,
    Miners, farmers, sailors, tradesmen,
      From each hamlet, town and glen,
    Born of Nova Scotian mothers
      From the breed of manly men.

    All alert and ever watching,
      On the guard both day and night,
    Each one ever his part doing,
      In the struggle for the right;
    Thinking always of the homeland
      Far away in Acadie,
    Of a mother, wife, or sister
      Whom they never more might see.

    On the high hills overlooking,
      All the country down below,
      In their deep concreted dugouts,
      Lay the ever watchful foe;
    With artillery commanding
    All the hills for miles around,
    Through which, like a thread of silver,
      River Somme its free way wound.

    There were Saxons and Bavarians
      In the Hun’s embattled host,
    And the fierce and bloody Uhlans
      Whom the Kaiser loves to toast;
    Where they stood in close formation
      Like a solid human block
    Fronted by the famous fighters
      Called the troops of battle shock.

    When upon the morn in question,
      Just about the break of day,
    Word the Twenty-fifth was given
      To make ready for the fray;
    And they sprang up from their trenches
      Like the wild lynx with a bound,
    And they rushed without a falter
      Right across the barrage ground;

    And they fell upon the Germans
      Like an avalanche of hail,
    And the Teutons bent before them
      Like the grain before the gale.
    And with irresisting fury
      They assailed the faltering Hun,
    And before the day was over
      Famous Courcellette was won.

    Then let mothers tell their babies
      Whom they nurse upon their breasts,
    And the teachers tell the children
      In our schools from east to west,
    How at Courcellette’s fierce battle,
      An undying name was made
    By the Twenty-fifth battalion
      Of the fighting fifth brigade.




VIMY RIDGE.


      For days the cannon roaring
      With loud incessant peal,
      The terrane and the trenches
        Had torn with lead and steel;
      Which told the boys in khaki
      Of fighting near at hand,
      And eagerly all waited
        The long wished for command.

      Within the first line trenches,
        The highland laddies lay,
      Their thoughts were of their mothers
        Or sweethearts far away;
    Each one of them was thinking
        Of home and native sod,
    And like a Christian soldier
        Had made his peace with God.

      The morn broke dark and stormy
        With hail and snow and sleet,
      Which made for many soldiers
        Ere night, their winding sheet;
      The shrapnel bits were flying,
        Like swarms of summer midge,
      When Borden’s highland laddies
        Charged up the Vimy Ridge.

      On the top of this famed mountain,
        Nearby the city Lens,
      The enemy in dugouts
        Lay like lions in their dens;
    The mountain strong by nature,
        The Germans stronger made
      With cannon and with mortar,
        On concrete bases laid.

    And thousands of machine guns,
      In their allotted place,
    And thousands of their snipers,
      With rifle and with brace;
    And lines of barbed wire fencing
      Of every strength and size,
    And aught else which their science
      Or cunning could devise.

    Their seeming sense of safety,
      The Teutons did elate,
    And all were glibly chanting
      The Kaiser’s hymn of hate,
    When, lo! the pibroch’s skirling
      Their first line did astound
    And Donald, Rod and Angus
      Came on them with a bound.

    And ere they had recovered
      From their astonishment
    The foremost of their gleemen
      To sing elsewhere were sent;
    And midst the cry of Kam’rade
      In broken English spoke,
    Both Prussian and Bavarian
      Went down from bayonet stroke.

    And furious was the struggle,
      ’Twixt Highlander and Hun,
    For hand to hand the fighting
      On Vimy Ridge was done.
    The shock troops of the Kaiser,
      And all his proud array,
    Fled fast before the Bluenose
      On that eventful day.

    And when the war is over,
      And peace again is come,
    We’ll give our gallant laddies
      A highland welcome home;
    With flags and banners waving,
      With singing and with cheer,
    We’ll celebrate the glory
      Of Vimy day each year.

[Illustration]




GOD SAVE OUR EMPIRE GREAT.


    God save our empire great,
    And to her board of state,
      Wise Counsel bring;
    May we in union free,
      Mother and daughters be,
    Ever one family:
      God save the king.
    Grant that there will arise,
    Beneath Canadian skies,
      Freedom’s offspring;
    May we be always free,
      From hate and bigotry,
    Co-heirs of liberty:
      God save the king.




THE VETERAN


    A veteran too was there with shoulders broad
    As is the marsh in Amherst’s neighborhood;
    Of stature high and of a kingly stride,
    And in his face there shone a noble pride.
    His eyes bespoke a soul to never yield
    In fair fought fight at home or battle field.
    A civic man before the war began
    And since its end again a civic man.
    Beloved by all his comrades, young and old,
    For wise decisions and for action bold;
    His head was cool but kindly was his heart,
    In every act of war he did his part--
    In digging in to use the lowly spade,
    In battle field to wield the bloody blade,
    In trench, in rest, to eat the soldiers’ fare,
    A man of manly breed, his wounds to bear.
    Three years he served where colored poppies grow
    Between the wooden “crosses, row on row,”
    Observing all, so well could tell a tale
        of Bourlon Wood or bloody Pachendaele.


Typographical errors corrected by the etext transcriber:

An Elegy Writtne in Richmond=> An Elegy Written in Richmond

Burnihing in colors=> Burnishing in colors

now ’Im old=> now I’m old

The Tuetons did elate=> The Teutons did elate

Of lovliness divine=> Of loveliness divine

perfect ecastasy=> perfect ecstasy

A sweet momoriam for aye=> A sweet memoriam for aye













End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Poems, by D. M. Matheson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POEMS ***

***** This file should be named 51554-0.txt or 51554-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/5/5/51554/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
